## Title: Genomic Prediction of Wheat Grain Yield using Machine Learning

Crops face multiple threats (e.g., climate change, soil degradation) at a time when the increasing global population will continue to demand more food. A key avenue to face these challenges is to increase yield and genomics is expected to play a crucial role in achieving this. Genomic Prediction (GP) is an approach to predict complex traits from their observed genotype. While GP was initially developed using Bayesian approaches, machine and deep learning methods have started to be used in recent years. For machine learning and deep learning (ML and DL) approaches, two generally important choices are the feature selection method and the type of model. Yet, there is currently a lack of studies evaluating the interaction between different feature selection methods and predictive models. Our work intends to fill this knowledge gap by using a fully factorial design to compare the GP performance of 12 prediction models (including 8 ML, 3 Bayesian and 1 DL model) using features selected by 4 different feature selection approaches.  

Our results show that the choice of the prediction model is the most important, as highly predictive models tend to be highly consistent, independently of the feature selection approach. Conversely, the performance of more poorly predictive methods tends to be highly variable. Importantly, of all models tested, ML tree-based methods, particularly Random Forests, show the best performance, predicting wheat yield. Thus, we believe our study will be of interest for readers of Crop Science, as it will help guide both scientists and stakeholders in applying ML methods to Genomic Prediction problems.


